SAMPLE MINUTES
and instructions
Below you will find a sample of a club’s minutes.
Distribution – Minutes for your club should be completed and submitted to 
everyone listed on the Minutes Distribution List within 48 hours of your meeting. 
Minutes are submitted via email with the exception Library Archives which 
requires a hard copy.
Structure – Minutes should follow the agenda and the flow of the meeting.  All 
Meetings and minutes should follow Robert’s Rules. Minutes should start with the
attendance and continue through the motion to close the meeting (opening and
closing of the meeting should have times attached.) Each topic that is discussed 
should have a brief paragraph summarizing what was discussed. Motions should 
be found in the minutes as they occurred in the meeting. Motions – Each motion should be numbered. Numbering of motions starts at 
one at the beginning of each school year and continue from there until the next 
year.  EXAMPLE – your first meeting you start with motion #1 and go through 
motion #4.  At your next meeting you will start with motion #5.  If you read the 
sample below you will see that it started with motion #9 (the minutes from the 
week before left off at motion #8) and they end with motion #14 (next week they 
will start with motion #15. 
There is more to a motion than the number.  As you see in the sample below you
also need to list the last name of the person who made the motion and the last 
name of the person that gave the motion a 2nd
.  Then comes the body of the 
motion. 
The body of the motion is what you want to do and should contain the 5 W’s and
a how.  Who – who are you paying or who is involved. What – the amt. you are 
paying or what you are doing. Where – where is the money coming from (budget
or fundraising account or where is your event/trip. When – is your event/trip. Why 
– why are paying them. How – do you need a PO, a Cash Advance, a 
Reimbursement, a check 
Finally there is space to note how the vote happened – you list those in favor
(that agree,) those opposed (that disagree,) and any abstentions (those that did 
not vote.) Abstentions do not include absences.  If you add all the votes together
it should be one less than the number of members in attendance as the 
President does not vote (unless it is a re­vote.)  If the majority of members 
present are in favor the motion carries, if not the motion fails. 
If you have any questions regarding your minutes please feel free to contact
someone in the Student Activities office for help.
Skateboarding Club
3.21.07 
Shafer Hall Room 221
Budget Account #BAMJ08, Fundraising Account #BAMK08 
Attendance:
President: KayTe Bettencourt, Vice­President: Dennis Mayes, Secretary:
Sarah Tynan, Treasurer: Carrie Spaulding, Advisor: Valerie Nettleton, John 
Bazin, Members: Jeromy Marchand, Chris Casie, Josh Brown, Kim Cardinal,  Joanna Kennedy, Matt Spaulding
A Quorum was established. 
The meeting was called to order at 6:02pm by President Bettencourt.
Motion #9: (Casie/Kennedy) Motion to accept the minutes from the meeting on
September 12, 2006.
7 in favor/0 opposed/1 abstention.  Motion Carries
President Report
Constitution is finalized and was passed to all members of the committee and a 
copy will be submitted to Valerie Nettleton. On April 12, 2006 at 5pm, the
committee will first distribute the first aid kits to the boarders that ordered them in 
Winthrop Hall and then to the other Residence halls. Kim offered to drive the van.
Vice President Report
Dennis spoke with DJ Sk8 and he was free for the date of May 18, 2007 for our
Skate­a­Palooza from 8pm – 12am. He will provide his largest sound system, 
lights, mardi gras beads, glow sticks, and a full array of albums and artists. His 
price will be the same as last year which is $600. Motion #10: (Marchand/Brown) To pay Bryan Caplette for dj services of $600 for
the Skate­a­Palooza held on May 18, 2007 at Mystic Marriot from 8pm – 12am.  6 in favor/1 opposed/1 abstention.  Motion Carries
Treasurer Report
The balances in our accounts are as follows: 
BAMJ08 (Budget): $2,564.33
BAMK08 (Fundraising): $1,547.89 
We are still waiting for the invoice from Boards ‘R Us.  Our order came in under
budget so some of that money will be going back into our budget account.
Secretary’s Report
No report at this time.
Old Business
Our event registration for the Skate Board workshop was approved.  We need to 
submit the Room Reservation Form to Mark Massinda to book Webb Lawn for
the 20th of April.  C. Spaulding volunteered to take care of this.  We will vote on 
the funding for this event next week. 
We need to discuss our Trip to NY on April 28th
.  The hotel faxed us an invoice 
for $1,010.00.  We were able to get University Vans to drive down there but they 
will cost $20 to park them for the weekend.  We also need to decide if we are 
going to pay for meals for those going.
Motion #11: (M. Spaulding/Brown) To allocate $1,010.00 in a Purchase Order to
the Best Western to pay for our hotel for April 28th out of our budget account.
8 in favor/0 opposed/0 abstentions.  Motion Carries
Motion #12: (Caplette/Tynan) To allocate $20.00 in a cash advance to KayTe 
Bettencourt to pay for parking in NY for the night of April 18 th from our budget 
account. 
8 in favor/0 opposed/0 abstentions.  Motion Carries 
The most that we could give each person for their meals for the two days is 
$96.00.  We are bringing 20 people.  If we gave each person the max that would 
be $1,920.00  This money is coming out of our fundraising account.  We want to
pay for as much as we can as those going are paying for the skate expo on their
own but we don’t want to wipe out our fundraising account.
Motion #13: (Brown/Casie) To allocate $1,000.00 ($50 per person) for meals in 
a cash advance to Valerie Nettleton for our trip to NY on the 18th from our
fundraising account.  6 in favor/2 opposed/0 abstentions.  Motion Carries
New Business
Nominations for all Executive Board positions for next year will be held in two 
weeks.  The following week we will have elections.  If you are interested in 
running for a position please talk to the person currently in the position about the
responsibilities of the job. Announcements
West Indian Society is having a Patty Sale on Monday. 
The President’s Inauguration is on the 13th of April.  Everyone should go – look in 
your email for information. Motion #14: (Kennedy/M. Spaulding) To adjourn meeting at 6:45 pm.  8 in favor/0 opposed/0 abstentions.  Motion Carries
Respectfully submitted by:
Sarah Tynan



What Are Meeting Minutes?
Meeting minutes are the written record of what was discussed and decided during a meeting. They typically include the date and time of the meeting, a list of attendees, a summary of the topics discussed, decisions made, action items assigned, and the time of adjournment.

Minutes are essential for providing an official account of the meeting, ensuring accountability, and helping attendees recall important details. They are usually prepared by a designated person, such as a secretary or administrative assistant, and are approved at the subsequent meeting.

What Should You Include When Writing Meeting Minutes?
The five steps that you must include are:

Pre-Planning
Record taking – at the meeting
Minutes writing or transcribing
Distributing or sharing of meeting minutes
Filing or storage of minutes for future reference
For more detail on each step, read on!

Read more: 13 Meeting Minutes Templates for More Productive Nonprofit Board Meetings

Who Should Write the Meeting Minutes?
Meeting minutes are typically written by the designated secretary or administrative assistant of the group or organization. In some cases, a specific member of the group may be assigned to take minutes for a particular meeting.

The person responsible for writing the minutes should be someone who is attentive, detail-oriented, and capable of accurately capturing the discussions and decisions made during the meeting.

Meeting Minutes Template:
Here’s a simple template you can refer to next time you need to take meeting minutes:

Organization Name

Meeting Minutes

Date:

Opening:
The meeting was called to order at [Time] by [Name] at [Location].

Present:
[List of all present members]

Absent:
[List of any members who were not present]

Approval of Agenda:
The agenda was reviewed and approved.

Approval of Minutes:
The minutes from the previous meeting were reviewed and approved.

Business From the Previous Meeting:

[Summary of any motions or topics from the previous meeting, including decisions made]
New Business:

[Summary of any new motions or topics raised, including decisions made]
Additions to the Agenda:

[Summary of any additional items raised during the meeting]
Adjournment:
The meeting was adjourned at [Time] by [Name]. The next meeting will be held on [Date] at [Location].

Minutes submitted by:
[Name]

Minutes approved by:
[Name]

How to Create Your Meeting Minute Process
As mentioned above, there are essentially five steps involved with meeting minutes:

Pre-Planning
Record taking – at the meeting
Minutes writing or transcribing
Distributing or sharing of meeting minutes
Filing or storage of minutes for future reference
Pre-Plan Your Meeting Minutes
A well-planned meeting helps ensure effective meeting minutes.  If the Chair and the Secretary or minutes-taker work together to ensure the agenda and meeting are well thought out, it makes minute taking much easier.

For example, depending on the meeting structure and the tools you use, the minutes-taker could work with the Chair to create a document format that works as an agenda and minutes outline as well.

Set the Agenda of a Meeting
At the very least, it’s important to get a copy of the meeting agenda and use it as a guide or outline for taking notes, setting up your mom format, and preparing the minutes – with the order and numbering of items on the minutes of meeting matching those of the agenda.

In addition, the agenda and/or meeting notice also provides information that will need to be included in the minutes, such as:

the names of all the meeting attendees, including guests or speakers
documents that are sent out with the agenda or handed out in the meeting – copies (digital or hard copy) of handouts should be stored with the meeting minutes for future reference and for sharing with those who were unable to attend the meeting (and others as determined by the meeting’s Chair).
Clarify Expectations
When you take on a new role as minutes-taker or Secretary, be sure to ask the Chair of the committee or Board what their expectations are of your role during the meeting, as well as the type of detail he/she expects in the minutes.

For example, if your Board or committee will be dealing with motions, or voting on items/issues, be clear on whether you need to offer names of those making motions, seconding, etc. If you will be dealing with this type of procedures, you (and your Chair) may want to refer to Robert’s Rules of Order.

What Should Be Included in Meeting Minutes?
Before you start taking notes, it’s important to understand the type of information you need to record at the meeting. As noted earlier, your organization may have required content and a specific meeting minute format that you’ll need to follow, but generally, meeting minutes usually include the following:

Date and time of the meeting
Names of the meeting participants and those unable to attend (e.g., “regrets”)
Acceptance or corrections/amendments to previous meeting minutes
Decisions made about each agenda item, for example:
Actions taken or agreed to be taken
Next steps
Voting outcomes – e.g., (if necessary, details regarding who made motions; who seconded and approved or via show of hands, etc.)
Motions taken or rejected
Items to be held over
New business
Next meeting date and time
You can find more templates and details on formatting meeting minutes here.

The Minutes Writing Process
Once the meeting is over, it’s time to pull together your notes and write the minutes. Here are some tips that might help:

Try to write the minutes as soon after the meeting as possible while everything is fresh in your mind.
Review your outline and if necessary, add additional notes or clarify points raised. Also check to ensure all decisions, actions and motions are clearly noted.
Ensure you’re including sufficient detail
For Board of Director’s minutes in particular, we recommend including a short description of each action taken, as well as the rationale behind the decision
If there was a lot of discussion before passing a motion, write down the major arguments for and against
Edit to ensure brevity and clarity, so the minutes are easy to read
In terms of mom format, here are a few things to keep in mind:
Be objective
Write in the same tense throughout
Avoid using names other than to record motions and seconds.
Avoid personal observations — the minutes should be solely fact-based
If you need to refer to other documents, don’t try to summarize them. Rather, simply indicate where they can be found or attach them as an appendix
Meeting Minute Best Practices:
Create an outline
As discussed earlier, having an outline (or template) based on the agenda makes it easy for you to simply jot down notes, decisions, etc. under each item as you go along. If you are taking notes by hand, consider including space below each item on your outline for your hand-written notes, then print these out and use this to capture minutes.

Check-off attendees as they join the meeting
If you know the meeting attendees, you can check them off as they arrive, if not have folks introduce themselves at the start of the meeting or circulate an attendance list they can check-off themselves.

Record decisions or notes on action items
As the meeting progresses, it will be critical to annotate decisions and key points made in your outline as soon as they occur to be sure they are recorded accurately. Include the names of the owners of the action items and other key personnel involved.

Ask for clarification if necessary
Don’t be afraid to speak up if you need clarification on something that was said in the meeting. It’s your job to make these meeting minutes as accurate as possible.

For example, if the group moves on without making a decision or an obvious conclusion, ask for clarification of the decision and/or next steps involved.

Don’t try to capture it all
You can’t keep up if you try to write down the conversation verbatim, so be sure to simply (and clearly) write (or type) just the decisions, assignments, action steps, etc.

Record the meeting
If you are concerned about being able to keep up with note taking, consider recording the meeting (e.g., on your smart phone, iPad, recording device, etc.) but be sure to let participants know they are being recording.

While you don’t want to use the recording to create a word-for-word transcript of the meeting, the recording can come in handy if you want to review the meeting for clarification.

Download our Meeting Minute Checklist for Associations and Nonprofits with sample minutes taken at a meeting and learn how to take better minutes. 

Meeting Minutes Samples:
Still wondering if you’re taking notes correctly? Here’s a sample of what meeting minutes at a board meeting might look like.

Sample meeting minutes from the beekeepers association

Do Meeting Minutes Have To Be Approved?
Yes, meeting minutes typically need to be approved to ensure accuracy and completeness. The approval process usually occurs at the beginning of the next meeting, where attendees review the minutes from the previous meeting and either approve them as written or suggest corrections.

Once approved, the minutes become the official record of the meeting. This process helps maintain transparency and accountability within the organization.

Before you share your meeting minutes, make sure that your board chair has reviewed and either revised and/or approved the minutes for circulation. They are not an official record of a meeting unless this has taken place.

Distributing or Sharing Meeting Minutes
As the official “minutes-taker” or Secretary, your role may include dissemination of the minutes.

Online sharing
The method of sharing or distribution will depend on the tools that you and your organization use. Since minutes and other documentation can create a pile of paper, it’s great if you can use a paperless sharing process. For example, if you are using a word processing tool (e.g., Microsoft Word) that doesn’t offer online sharing, you might want to create a PDF of the document and send this and the other attachments or meeting documentation via email.

Alternately, if you are all using Google docs – for meeting invitations, agenda and additional document sharing – you can simply “share” the document with that group once it has been finalized. Committee or Board members can simply read the documents online and save a few trees!

Sharing in the Cloud?
If your organization is using a cloud-based membership management system (like WildApricot), you can publish the minutes as a web page and give access only to the committee or Board members, depending on your organization’s needs. Through members-only webpages, you can create a secure online Intranet for your Board and committees.

Start a free trial of WildApricot today. Click here

Tools Specifically For Meeting Minutes:
If you are wondering about the types of tools you might use specifically for meeting minutes, here are some tools that organizations we’ve worked with have found helpful:

Google Docs: Also supports collaborative note taking. [Here are some meeting minute sample templates in Google docs.  If you send out a meeting request using Google Calendar, you can attach a Google doc agenda outline. Once minutes are crafted (using the outline), you can simply share the document with the group using their email addresses.]
OneNote: (if you are a Microsoft user) – Very fast and allows for organization of notes.  Also support audio recording with corresponding note time-stamping.
Notion: Notion is a great platform for organizing meeting minutes. It’s hierarchical document structure is a fantastic way to organize your meeting minutes in any way you want.
Evernote: Great note taking tool.
Agreedo: supports creation of meeting minutes and tracking the results.
minutes.io: allows you to quickly take meeting minutes with hotkey shortcuts and the ability to work online or offline.
Filing/Storage of Meeting Minutes
Most committees and Boards review and either approve or amend the minutes at the beginning of the subsequent meeting. Once you’ve made any required revisions, the minutes will then need to be stored for future reference.

Some organizations may store these online (e.g., in Google docs or SkyDrive) and also back these up on an external hard drive.  You may also need to print and store hard copies as well or provide these to a staff member or Chair for filing.

What Is the Purpose of Meeting Minutes?
You shouldn’t be intimidated by the term “minutes”, since it’s actually a little misleading. After all, your committee or Board doesn’t want or need a record of its meeting proceedings minute by minute!  But it is important to capture the essence of the meeting, including details such as:

decisions made (motions made, votes, etc.)
next steps planned
identification and tracking of action items
Minutes are a tangible record of the meeting for its participants and a source of information for members who were unable to attend. In some cases, meeting minutes can act as a reference point, for example:

when a meeting’s outcomes impact other collaborative activities or projects within the organization
minutes can serve to notify (or remind) individuals of tasks assigned to them and/or timelines
Download our Meeting Minute Checklist for Associations and Nonprofits with examples and learn how to take better minutes. 

Why Are They Called Minutes of a Meeting?
According to Today I Found Out, the “minutes” of “meeting minutes” don’t refer to the minute measurement of time, but to the “minute” (my-newt) notes taken during meetings.

And… If You’re a Nonprofit with Regular Board and Member Meetings
If you’re a nonprofit with regular board and member meetings and you want to save time and money managing your organization, get a free trial of WildApricot, an all-in-one membership management software which allows you to:

Easily schedule online events with instant online payment processing and automated invoices.
Create a stunning website with online member applications.
Access an easy-to-search and filter contact database.
Send out professionally-designed newsletters and emails.
and much more.
Find out all the features of WildApricot’s free membership management software here.

WildApricot is also the the #1 rated membership management software used by over 20,000 organizations every day. Get your free trial now.

Start a free trial of WildApricot today. Click here

In Closing…Enjoy Your New Role!
Meeting minutes are important – after all, they capture the essential information of a meeting. But taking and preparing minutes doesn’t have to be a daunting task. We hope this article helps meeting minutes newbies in getting started in creating effective meeting minutes for your organization.

Thank you for reading our guide on how to write meeting minutes!